Miscellaneous Notes on the Classes of Tantra and Pith Instructions of the Great Chariots of the Practice Lineage in the Land of Snows The Five Aggregates Namo Mañjughoṣāya! I. The Aggregate of Form In general, all phenomena are subsumed into conditioned and unconditioned phenomena, and all conditioned phenomena are contained in the five aggregates. As it is stated in the Tantra: Form, feeling, perception, Formations, and consciousness- These are eminently explained to be the five aggregates. To elaborate, the entity called "form" is defined as that which is capable of manifesting as form. "Aggregate" is a term for that which has the characteristic of being gathered together. An aggregate is defined as that which is a gathering of many particulars. In this context, the meaning of the phrase "capable of manifesting as form" is that each form retains its own defining characteristics, such as "that which is hard and solid is the earth." Form is classified into fifteen types. A. Causal Forms Causal forms are seed-like causes: earth is solid, water is moist and wet, fire is hot and burning, and air is light and moving. B. Resultant Forms Resultant forms are sprout-like results: the eye faculty that is like a flax flower, the ear faculty that is like twisted birch bark, the nose faculty that is like parallel copper tubes, the tongue faculty that is like a half-moon, and the body faculty that is like skin that is soft to the touch. These five are distinctive in not being visible objects and in being more transparent than other types of form. The bulging eye, the conch-like nose, and so on are their basis. When sleeping and fainting, for example, the support and supported are understood to be the same. When awakening or regaining consciousness, they have a support. There are five objects (form and so forth). The meaning of "faculty" is that it is the general term for the individual faculties, such as sight and feeling. Therefore, the eye consciousness is the subject; form is the object, external object, or observed object. 1. VISUAL FORMS Moreover, there are two general categories of visual forms and twenty particular types. First, the general categories are shape and color. Shape is divided into long and short, high and low, even and uneven surfaces, and round and square. Color is divided into the root and branch colors. The root colors are blue, yellow, white, and red. The eight branch colors are cloud, smoke, dust, mist, illumination, darkness, sunlight, and shadow. In sum, these are the twenty distinct types of visual form. 2. SOUNDS There are eight types of sound, which are divided into those that arise from organic elements and those that arise from inorganic elements. Organic sounds include those that express meaning and those that do not. The former are speech in general, such as saying "here" and so on. The latter are meaningless sounds, like buzzing. Inorganic sounds also include sounds that express a meaning, such as the beating of the drum of the gods, which causes one to understand the four Dharma seals, and inorganic sounds that do not express meaning, like the sounds of the four elements. Each of those are also divided into pleasant and unpleasant, making eight. 3. ODORS There are two types of odors: fragrant and foul-smelling. Those are further divided into natural and synthetic, making four categories. 4. TASTES There are six types of taste: bitter, astringent, spicy, salty, sweet, and sour. 5. TANGIBLE OBJECTS There are eleven types of tangible objects: the tangible objects of the causal four elements and the seven resultant tangible objects deriving from the four elements: soft and rough, heavy and light, hunger and thirst, and cold. C. Imperceptible Forms Imperceptible forms pervade the body in a general way through the force of karma. Classified in terms of vows, there are the imperceptible forms of virtuous vows, unvirtuous vows, and temporary vows. In this way, broadly speaking, there are fifteen categories of form. II. The Aggregate of Feeling Second, as for the aggregate of feeling, feeling is defined as experience. It is divided into pleasure, suffering, and neutrality. These are applied to each in the sixfold collection of consciousness-the pleasurable sensation of contact with the eye, [object and consciousness], and so on-making eighteen. III. The Aggregate of Perception Third, regarding the aggregate of perception, perception is defined as apprehending signs in objects (gender markers, such as male and female). It is respectively divided into three: limited, extensive, and middling. Respectively, limited perception is focused on the desire realm, extensive perception is focused on the form realm, and measureless perception is focused on the formless realm. IV. The Aggregate of Formations Fourth, regarding the aggregate of formations, mental activity is manifestly characterized by formations. (Mental factors intend all actions.) It is divided into the fifty-one mental factors. In summary, these are as follows. A. The Five Omnipresent Mental Factors Feeling, perception, intention, contact, and mental engagement- These are the five omnipresent mental factors. These five mental factors always serve as a retinue of consciousness: (1) mental engagement applies consciousness to an object, (2) contact connects object, faculty, and consciousness, (3) perception apprehends characteristics in an object, (4) feeling experiences the object, and (5) intention comprises internal mental activity. B. The Five Object-Determining Mental Factors Aspiration, interest, recollection, samādhi, and prajñā- These are the object-determining mental factors. Determining phenomena individually, these are different from the other attendant factors of the mental consciousness: (1) aspiration seeks the entity one is thinking of, (2) interest grasps with determination onto an entity that is determined, (3) recollection does not forget familiar objects, (4) samādhi is a mind that is single pointed toward the entity focused upon, and (5) prajñā discriminates between phenomena. C. The Eleven Virtuous Mental Factors Faith, conscientiousness, pliancy, Equanimity, shame, embarrassment, Lacking attachment, anger, ignorance, Nonviolence, and diligence- These are the eleven virtuous mental factors. (1) Faith is a state of mental purity, (2) shame means to shun wrongful deeds in relation to oneself and the Dharma, (3) embarrassment is being weary of wrongful actions because of others in the world, (4) nonattachment is revulsion, (5) non-anger is compassion, and (6) non-ignorance is the knowledge of individual phenomena. In short, they are the remedies of the three poisons. (7) Diligence is the remedy to laziness; it is the desire to quickly meet with results. (8) Conscientiousness is the antidote to carelessness; it is to be wary of faults. (9) Pliancy is flexibility of the body and mind; it is the attainment of independence. (10) Equanimity is a formation that lacks both relaxation and exertion. And (11) nonviolence is love. D. The Six Afflictions Attachment, anger, pride, Ignorance, doubt, and wrong view- These are the six root afflictive emotions. (1) Attachment is desire for the body and wealth. (2) Anger is a vindictive attitude toward others. (3) Pride has the character of conceit and is divided into seven (vanities): pride; exalted pride; overbearing pride; the pride of considering an "I," which is attachment to self; the pride of thinking that someone is only slightly better than oneself even though the difference is great; the pride of greatly valuing one's qualities even though they do not deserve to be valued that much; and mistaken pride. (4) Ignorance is to not know about the Three Jewels, the four truths, and karmic cause and effect. Regarding the four truths, the truth of suffering is like rain, the truth of origin is like a cloud, the truth of cessation is like the sky, and the truth of the path is like wind. (5) Doubt has the character of being of two minds about something. (6) There are five types of wrong view: the view concerning the transitory collection by means of which one grasps to a self, the view by which one grasps to extremes, mistaken view, holding one's own view as supreme, and holding one's own discipline and austerity to be supreme. There are twenty types of views concerning the transitory collection: viewing the five aggregates in terms of self by thinking that form is the self and so on, views of endowment that hold that the self is endowed with form and so on, and views that they abide in one another, such as the thought "form abides in the self" and the thought "the self abides in form." As for the views by which one grasps to extremes, there are the eight extremes of arising or cessation, permanence or annihilation, going or coming, and one or many, as well as the four extremes of existence or nonexistence and permanence or annihilation. Combined together with the five views, the five afflictions that are not views, such as desire and anger, comprise the ten subtle proliferators of existence. E. The Twenty Subsidiary Afflictions Wrath (of the mind), enmity (about the past, concealment), spite (irritation), envy (not wanting to allow another's shoulders to get higher than one's own), miserliness, deceit, guile, self-satisfaction (being spoiled), wildly indulging, being unashamed (of oneself or because of the Dharma), being unembarrassed (because of others), torpor, excitement (craving), lack of faith, laziness, heedlessness, forgetfulness, inattentiveness (like falling off a cliff), and distraction-these are the twenty subsidiary mental afflictions. The twenty subsidiary afflictions arise subsidiarily to the primary ones. F. The Four Changeable Mental Factors Sleep, contrition, examination, and analysis- These are the four changeable mental factors. The four change [into virtue or non-virtue] due to other factors. The forty-nine mental factors that remain after subtracting feeling and perception are the aggregates of formation, and they are concurrent with mind. G. The Fourteen Non-Concurrent Formations There are fourteen formations that are not concurrent with mind: Attainment, non-attainment, equal allotment, Non-perception and the two types of meditative absorption, Life force, birth, old age, duration, impermanence, And the groups of names, words, and syllables. Thus, there are three categories within the aggregate of formations. V. The Aggregate of Consciousness The aggregate of consciousness is defined as awareness of an object. It is classified into six collections. According to Mahāyāna, there are eight collections. The basis of all is like the ocean, undisturbed by wind. The six types of engaging consciousness are like waves. Afflicted intellect, together with its own exclusive four attendant factors, through regarding the basis of all (inwardly directed grasping at a self), grasps at it as a self. These four attendant factors are confusing it for a self (not knowing any reason apart from saying "self"), viewing it as a self, taking pride in it as a self, and attachment to a self. If one summarizes the eightfold collection of consciousness, there are three types of mind: (1) the basis of all consciousness, which impartially engages in mental impressions of its objective referents, merely observing them in a general way; (2) afflicted intellect, which refers to the intellect; and (3) the six types of engaged consciousness, referring to consciousness. 
